## In response to Isaac Asimov on creativity

Isaac Asimov once wrote a [quite thoughtful piece](
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/531911/isaac-asimov-asks-how-do-people-get-new-ideas/
) on how to stimulate the formation of new ideas. If you haven't read it yet, I
highly recommend it. 

--------------

### On the contents of Asimov's essay
Asimov makes several observations and recommendations, mostly in the vein of
reducing pressure, enabling knowledge-sharing, and, crucially, making sure
people feel free to form and share their own thoughts (explicitly pointing out
several failure modes). Common themes seem to be a perspective on facts as "raw
ingredients for discovery" and the necessity of a relaxed atmosphere for
discovery.

Another sense I get from Asimov, though I don't see it written out explicitly in his
essay, is that serendipity is essential. Someone, somewhere, might be capable of
"connecting the dots", but you can't know who, nor what dots need connecting
(else, they'd be connected already). Or, conversely, any given person
might be able to connect dots in an interesting fashion, but you can't know what
dots that specific person might be able to connect. Therefore, it is advised to
give them as many dots as possible, and then leave them free to try and connect
them however they wish. 

### Useful interactions
Asimov seems to recommend a mix of isolation and meeting sessions. While his
arguments for both are sound, I think breaking meetings up in sessions walks
into the trap he himself describes as lethal: it creates pressure. Somehow,
meetings should achieve an unforced interaction pattern.

One interaction I noticed recently was one typical between PhD students in a
shared office: one had a thought, asked someone else about it, and as I'm
writing this, they've spent about an hour puzzling, and one person has been
replaced by another. They stand by a whiteboard for a while, share their
thoughts, then go off to puzzle on their own, then one speaks up to share an
observation, and the others either react or keep working on their own approach.

What is happening here? This meeting was neither planned, nor does it truly seem
like a single meeting. Rather, the participants were working on their own
problems independently, until one encountered something interesting and shared
it. Then, those whose attention was caught by the problem at hand got involved,
and they spontaneously formed a meeting of sorts. But they're only talking about
half the time if that. They self-regulate their amount of interaction and their
amount of independent work. Knowledge is exchanged at an unhurried pace, but
without barriers. 

This isn't unique to this precise setting, I've also seen it happen in break
rooms, and sometimes even at parties, among people at various stages in their
education or career. But they all have a similar character, and it seems to
confirm Asimov's own injunction against pressure, even the pressure of purpose.
Additionally, what Asimov didn't mention but likely considered implicitly
obvious, is the necessity of the people involved being interested. 

So, how do we stimulate this kind of interaction? Without wanting to give a
precise, definitive recipe, I'm going to give an approximate one, and likely
only part of it is relevant, while some other parts are optional, and there
might be things missing that do matter:
 - In all of the following, keep Asimov's warnings against stifling creativity
   in mind.
 - Get a group of people who enjoy thinking, with some overlap in their
   interests.
 - Put them together in a loose configuration. Minimize barriers to inviting
   others to think about something, joining active deliberations, or,
   importantly, to refuse to join.
 - Sample configurations are break rooms, shared offices, parties, or housing
   with a common area. 
 - Give each person something to think about vaguely related to whatever you
   hope to discover. It isn't in itself important that they finish it, but
   progress to completion is a powerful motivator. The point of this is that in
   thinking about their assigned subject, they stir up side topics, which is
   what we want. 
 - Provide plenty of scratch paper, personal desk space, shared desk space, one
   or (preferably) more whiteboards (and/or blackboards), with markers and
   erasers. Also provide a way for people who aren't interested in the current
   specific topic of conversation to opt out of it and focus on their own thoughts
   (noise-canceling headphones in a shared office spring to mind. Or even just
   headphones)
 - Don't worry when they go off on wild tangents, that's almost the entire point
   of this configuration.
 - Try to facilitate access to resources, both human experts and libraries. Not
   all knowledge they might turn out to need is necessarily available within the
   group. 
 - Encourage them to write down whenever they think of something they consider
   interesting. 

Writing this down, it seems that the goal of writing a PhD thesis might not be
the thesis itself, but being involved in this kind of process. It would explain
why PhD students are expected to write several papers, and why they're put in
proximity to each other (besides the obvious space constraints). 
